TECHNICAL_MANUAL.md, before:

# DocForge Technical Manual

This document provides a technical overview of the DocForge application's architecture, components, and key systems.

---

## 1. Technology Stack

-   **Framework:** [Electron](https://www.electronjs.org/) for cross-platform desktop application development.
-   **UI Library:** [React](https://reactjs.org/) for building the user interface.
-   **Language:** [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) for type safety and improved developer experience.
-   **Editor Core:** [Monaco Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/) for a rich, consistent editing experience.
-   **Database:** [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/index.html) via the [better-sqlite3](https://github.com/WiseLibs/better-sqlite3) library for robust, local data storage.
-   **Bundler:** [esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/) for fast and efficient bundling of the application's source code.
-   **Styling:** [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) for a utility-first CSS framework.
-   **Packaging:** [electron-builder](https://www.electron.build/) for creating distributable application packages.

---

## 2. Project Structure

```
doc-forge/
├── assets/               # Static assets like the application icon.
├── components/           # Reusable React components.
│   ├── iconsets/         # SVG icon components for different libraries.
│   └── ...
├── contexts/             # React context providers for global state.
├── electron/             # Source code for the Electron main process.
│   ├── database.ts       # Manages the SQLite database connection and migrations.
│   ├── schema.ts         # Contains the embedded SQL schema string.
│   ├── main.ts           # Main process entry point.
│   └── preload.ts        # Preload script for secure IPC.
├── hooks/                # Custom React hooks for business logic.
├── services/             # Modules for data access and external systems.
│   ├── preview/          # Renderer plugins for the preview system.
│   └── ...
├── release/              # Output directory for packaged application.
├── dist/                 # Output directory for bundled code.
├── index.html            # The main HTML file for the renderer process.
├── index.tsx             # The entry point for the React application.
├── package.json          # Project metadata and dependencies.
└── ...
```

---

## 3. Application Architecture

### Electron Main Process (`electron/`)

The main process is responsible for managing the application lifecycle, database, and native OS interactions.

-   **Window Management:** It creates the frameless `BrowserWindow` which contains the React UI.
-   **Database Management (`database.ts`):** This service is the single owner of the SQLite database file. It uses `better-sqlite3` to open the connection, run schema migrations on startup, and execute queries. All database access must go through this service.
-   **IPC (Inter-Process Communication):** It sets up IPC handlers to listen for events from the renderer process. The UI communicates with the database *exclusively* through these channels. Key handlers include:
    -   `db:query`, `db:run`: Generic handlers to execute SQL against the database.
    -   `db:duplicate-nodes`: A handler to perform a deep, transactional copy of selected nodes.
    -   `db:migrate-from-json`: A special handler for the one-time migration of data from old JSON files.
    -   Window Controls: Handlers for `window:minimize`, `window:maximize`, etc.
-   **Security:** The `preload.ts` script uses Electron's `contextBridge` to securely expose specific IPC functions to the renderer process under the `window.electronAPI` object, maintaining context isolation.

### Renderer Process (React)

The renderer process is responsible for the entire user interface.

-   **Component Tree:** The application is built as a tree of React components, starting from `index.tsx`.
-   **UI State:** Most UI state is managed within components using React hooks (`useState`, `useMemo`).
-   **Business & Data Logic:** Logic for managing the application's data is encapsulated in custom hooks (e.g., `useNodes`, `useTemplates`, `useSettings`). These hooks interact with the `repository.ts` service to communicate with the backend.

### State Management

-   **React Hooks & Context:** Global state (like theme and logs) is shared via React Context.
-   **SQLite Database:** The single source of truth for all persistent data (documents, folders, templates, settings, versions) is the `docforge.db` SQLite file. Data is fetched into React state on load and updated in the database via the repository service.

---

## 4. Key Systems

### Database & Repository Service

This is the core data persistence layer, replacing the old JSON file system.

-   **`electron/database.ts` (Main Process):** Manages the physical database file and connection using `better-sqlite3`. It handles schema creation and versioning by executing SQL scripts embedded directly within the application's source code (`electron/schema.ts`). This removes the need for external `.sql` files and simplifies packaging.
-   **`services/repository.ts` (Renderer Process):** The data access layer for the UI. It acts as an abstraction over the IPC communication. It contains all the application's SQL queries and provides clear, async methods (e.g., `getNodeTree()`, `updateDocumentContent()`, `deleteDocVersions()`, `duplicateNodes()`) for the React hooks to use. It does *not* access the database directly.
-   **Schema:** The database uses a highly normalized schema with tables for `nodes` (hierarchy), `documents`, `content_store` (for content-addressable storage and deduplication), and `doc_versions`.
-   **One-Time Migration:** The repository contains logic to detect if it's the first run with the new database. If old JSON files are found, it reads them and sends the data to the main process to be migrated into the SQLite database in a single, safe transaction.

### Universal Editor & Preview System

This system provides a consistent and extensible editing experience for all document types. It is built on a decoupled, modular architecture.

-   **`CodeEditor.tsx`:** A React component that wraps and configures the Monaco Editor instance. It's responsible for managing the editor's content, theme, and language for syntax highlighting based on props.
-   **`PreviewPane.tsx`:** This component is responsible for displaying the rendered output of a document. It debounces content updates for performance and uses the `PreviewService` to get the correct output.
-   **`services/previewService.ts`:** This service acts as a registry for all available renderer "plugins." It exposes a method, `getRendererForLanguage()`, which finds and returns the appropriate renderer for a given language ID (e.g., 'markdown').
-   **Renderer Plugins (`services/preview/`):** Each file format with a preview is supported by a dedicated renderer class that implements the `IRenderer` interface. This makes the system highly extensible: to support a new format, one only needs to create a new renderer class and add it to the `previewService` registry. Currently, renderers for Markdown, HTML, and plaintext (fallback) are implemented.

### LLM Service (`services/llmService.ts`)

This module handles all communication with the external Large Language Model. It is largely unchanged by the database migration.
-   It constructs the appropriate API request body based on the configured API type (Ollama or OpenAI-compatible).
-   It includes robust error handling to manage connection failures or non-OK responses from the provider.

### Component Breakdown

-   **`App.tsx`:** The root component that orchestrates the entire application. It initializes the repository, triggers the data migration if needed, manages the main layout, and uses the data hooks (`useNodes`, `useSettings`, etc.).
-   **`Sidebar.tsx`:** Manages the display of the `nodes` tree (documents and folders) and templates. It handles search/filtering, drag-and-drop, and keyboard navigation.
-   **`DocumentEditor.tsx`:** The primary user-facing editor component. It serves as a layout controller, managing the view mode (editor, preview, split-screen) and containing both the `CodeEditor` (Monaco) and `PreviewPane` components. It orchestrates the flow of data between the editor and the preview.
-   **`SettingsView.tsx`:** Manages all application settings, which are now read from and saved to the `settings` table in the database.
-   **`DocumentHistoryView.tsx`:** This view now fetches version history for a document directly from the database, providing a reliable timeline of changes.

---

## 5. Build & Release Workflow

Electron Builder manages the packaging and publishing workflow for DocForge. The most relevant npm scripts are:

-   `npm run build` — Bundles the renderer and preload scripts, prepares assets in `dist/`, and generates platform icon binaries from the source SVG.
-   `npm run package` — Produces distributable builds without uploading them.
-   `npm run publish` — Builds the application and publishes artifacts using Electron Builder's configured GitHub target.

### Publishing a Release

1. Run `npm version <new-version> --no-git-tag-version` to bump the version in both `package.json` and `package-lock.json` without creating a Git tag.
2. Review and update the Markdown documentation (README, manuals, version logs) so the release notes accurately describe the changes.
3. Execute `npm run publish` to package the application and upload the release artifacts to GitHub.

### Application Icon Pipeline

-   The canonical icon artwork lives at `assets/icon.svg`. During `npm run build` (and thus during `npm run package`/`npm run publish`), the `scripts/prepare-icons.mjs` script validates the SVG and, if valid, generates the required `icon.icns`, `icon.ico`, and `icon.png` files in the `assets/` directory using `icon-gen`.
-   If the SVG is missing or invalid, the script logs a warning and leaves the existing binary icon assets untouched so packaging can proceed with the previous icons.
-   To regenerate icons without running a full build, execute `npm run prepare:icons`.

Commit message:

Add configurable offline PlantUML rendering

TECHNICAL_MANUAL.md, after:

# DocForge Technical Manual

This document provides a technical overview of the DocForge application's architecture, components, and key systems.

---

## 1. Technology Stack

-   **Framework:** [Electron](https://www.electronjs.org/) for cross-platform desktop application development.
-   **UI Library:** [React](https://reactjs.org/) for building the user interface.
-   **Language:** [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) for type safety and improved developer experience.
-   **Editor Core:** [Monaco Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/) for a rich, consistent editing experience.
-   **Database:** [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/index.html) via the [better-sqlite3](https://github.com/WiseLibs/better-sqlite3) library for robust, local data storage.
-   **Bundler:** [esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/) for fast and efficient bundling of the application's source code.
-   **Styling:** [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) for a utility-first CSS framework.
-   **Packaging:** [electron-builder](https://www.electron.build/) for creating distributable application packages.

---

## 2. Project Structure

```
doc-forge/
├── assets/               # Static assets like the application icon.
├── components/           # Reusable React components.
│   ├── iconsets/         # SVG icon components for different libraries.
│   └── ...
├── contexts/             # React context providers for global state.
├── electron/             # Source code for the Electron main process.
│   ├── database.ts       # Manages the SQLite database connection and migrations.
│   ├── schema.ts         # Contains the embedded SQL schema string.
│   ├── main.ts           # Main process entry point.
│   └── preload.ts        # Preload script for secure IPC.
├── hooks/                # Custom React hooks for business logic.
├── services/             # Modules for data access and external systems.
│   ├── preview/          # Renderer plugins for the preview system.
│   └── ...
├── release/              # Output directory for packaged application.
├── dist/                 # Output directory for bundled code.
├── index.html            # The main HTML file for the renderer process.
├── index.tsx             # The entry point for the React application.
├── package.json          # Project metadata and dependencies.
└── ...
```

---

## 3. Application Architecture

### Electron Main Process (`electron/`)

The main process is responsible for managing the application lifecycle, database, and native OS interactions.

-   **Window Management:** It creates the frameless `BrowserWindow` which contains the React UI.
-   **Database Management (`database.ts`):** This service is the single owner of the SQLite database file. It uses `better-sqlite3` to open the connection, run schema migrations on startup, and execute queries. All database access must go through this service.
-   **IPC (Inter-Process Communication):** It sets up IPC handlers to listen for events from the renderer process. The UI communicates with the database *exclusively* through these channels. Key handlers include:
    -   `db:query`, `db:run`: Generic handlers to execute SQL against the database.
    -   `db:duplicate-nodes`: A handler to perform a deep, transactional copy of selected nodes.
    -   `db:migrate-from-json`: A special handler for the one-time migration of data from old JSON files.
    -   Window Controls: Handlers for `window:minimize`, `window:maximize`, etc.
-   **Security:** The `preload.ts` script uses Electron's `contextBridge` to securely expose specific IPC functions to the renderer process under the `window.electronAPI` object, maintaining context isolation.

### Renderer Process (React)

The renderer process is responsible for the entire user interface.

-   **Component Tree:** The application is built as a tree of React components, starting from `index.tsx`.
-   **UI State:** Most UI state is managed within components using React hooks (`useState`, `useMemo`).
-   **Business & Data Logic:** Logic for managing the application's data is encapsulated in custom hooks (e.g., `useNodes`, `useTemplates`, `useSettings`). These hooks interact with the `repository.ts` service to communicate with the backend.

### State Management

-   **React Hooks & Context:** Global state (like theme and logs) is shared via React Context.
-   **SQLite Database:** The single source of truth for all persistent data (documents, folders, templates, settings, versions) is the `docforge.db` SQLite file. Data is fetched into React state on load and updated in the database via the repository service.

---

## 4. Key Systems

### Database & Repository Service

This is the core data persistence layer, replacing the old JSON file system.

-   **`electron/database.ts` (Main Process):** Manages the physical database file and connection using `better-sqlite3`. It handles schema creation and versioning by executing SQL scripts embedded directly within the application's source code (`electron/schema.ts`). This removes the need for external `.sql` files and simplifies packaging.
-   **`services/repository.ts` (Renderer Process):** The data access layer for the UI. It acts as an abstraction over the IPC communication. It contains all the application's SQL queries and provides clear, async methods (e.g., `getNodeTree()`, `updateDocumentContent()`, `deleteDocVersions()`, `duplicateNodes()`) for the React hooks to use. It does *not* access the database directly.
-   **Schema:** The database uses a highly normalized schema with tables for `nodes` (hierarchy), `documents`, `content_store` (for content-addressable storage and deduplication), and `doc_versions`.
-   **One-Time Migration:** The repository contains logic to detect if it's the first run with the new database. If old JSON files are found, it reads them and sends the data to the main process to be migrated into the SQLite database in a single, safe transaction.

### Universal Editor & Preview System

This system provides a consistent and extensible editing experience for all document types. It is built on a decoupled, modular architecture.

-   **`CodeEditor.tsx`:** A React component that wraps and configures the Monaco Editor instance. It's responsible for managing the editor's content, theme, and language for syntax highlighting based on props.
-   **`PreviewPane.tsx`:** This component is responsible for displaying the rendered output of a document. It debounces content updates for performance and uses the `PreviewService` to get the correct output.
-   **`services/previewService.ts`:** This service acts as a registry for all available renderer "plugins." It exposes a method, `getRendererForLanguage()`, which finds and returns the appropriate renderer for a given language ID (e.g., 'markdown').
-   **Renderer Plugins (`services/preview/`):** Each file format with a preview is supported by a dedicated renderer class that implements the `IRenderer` interface. This makes the system highly extensible: to support a new format, one only needs to create a new renderer class and add it to the `previewService` registry. Currently, renderers for Markdown, HTML, and plaintext (fallback) are implemented.
-   **PlantUML Offline Rendering:** The Markdown renderer can now switch between the public PlantUML server and a bundled offline renderer. When offline mode is selected, the renderer calls the new `plantuml:render-offline` IPC handler, which invokes the `plantuml` npm package in the main process. The package executes the bundled `plantuml.jar` and requires a local Java Runtime Environment (JRE). Errors from the Java process are captured and relayed back to the renderer so the UI can display actionable feedback.

### LLM Service (`services/llmService.ts`)

This module handles all communication with the external Large Language Model. It is largely unchanged by the database migration.
-   It constructs the appropriate API request body based on the configured API type (Ollama or OpenAI-compatible).
-   It includes robust error handling to manage connection failures or non-OK responses from the provider.

### Component Breakdown

-   **`App.tsx`:** The root component that orchestrates the entire application. It initializes the repository, triggers the data migration if needed, manages the main layout, and uses the data hooks (`useNodes`, `useSettings`, etc.).
-   **`Sidebar.tsx`:** Manages the display of the `nodes` tree (documents and folders) and templates. It handles search/filtering, drag-and-drop, and keyboard navigation.
-   **`DocumentEditor.tsx`:** The primary user-facing editor component. It serves as a layout controller, managing the view mode (editor, preview, split-screen) and containing both the `CodeEditor` (Monaco) and `PreviewPane` components. It orchestrates the flow of data between the editor and the preview.
-   **`SettingsView.tsx`:** Manages all application settings, which are now read from and saved to the `settings` table in the database.
-   **`DocumentHistoryView.tsx`:** This view now fetches version history for a document directly from the database, providing a reliable timeline of changes.

---

## 5. Build & Release Workflow

Electron Builder manages the packaging and publishing workflow for DocForge. The most relevant npm scripts are:

-   `npm run build` — Bundles the renderer and preload scripts, prepares assets in `dist/`, and generates platform icon binaries from the source SVG.
-   `npm run package` — Produces distributable builds without uploading them.
-   `npm run publish` — Builds the application and publishes artifacts using Electron Builder's configured GitHub target.

### Publishing a Release

1. Run `npm version <new-version> --no-git-tag-version` to bump the version in both `package.json` and `package-lock.json` without creating a Git tag.
2. Review and update the Markdown documentation (README, manuals, version logs) so the release notes accurately describe the changes.
3. Execute `npm run publish` to package the application and upload the release artifacts to GitHub.

### Application Icon Pipeline

-   The canonical icon artwork lives at `assets/icon.svg`. During `npm run build` (and thus during `npm run package`/`npm run publish`), the `scripts/prepare-icons.mjs` script validates the SVG and, if valid, generates the required `icon.icns`, `icon.ico`, and `icon.png` files in the `assets/` directory using `icon-gen`.
-   If the SVG is missing or invalid, the script logs a warning and leaves the existing binary icon assets untouched so packaging can proceed with the previous icons.
-   To regenerate icons without running a full build, execute `npm run prepare:icons`.
